Sync up6 branch with master (#7040)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/featured-scenarios/manage-data-persistence-with-bal-persist.md

>**Info:** In this tutorial, we use an in-memory data store for simplicity. However, the methodology described here can also be applied to work with MySQL and Google Sheets as the `bal persist` currently offers support for these three data stores: in-memory tables, MySQL databases, and Google Sheets.

## Create a Ballerina package

Ballerina uses packages to group code. You need to create a Ballerina package and write the business logic in it. In the terminal, execute the command below to create the Ballerina package for the implementation.

> **Info:** For more information on Ballerina packages, see [Organize Ballerina code](/learn/organize-ballerina-code/).

```
$ bal new rainier
``` 

This creates a directory named `rainier` with the files below.

```
.
├── rainier
│   ├── Ballerina.toml
│   └── main.bal
```

## Initialize bal persist in the project

The `bal persist` initialization takes care of the basics needed to start the development. In the terminal, execute the command below to initialize `bal persist` in the Ballerina package.

```
$ bal persist init --module store
```

> Along with the `bal persist init` command, you can specify the `datastore` that you are going to use in the application and also the `module` that you need to add the generated code to. Both these parameters are optional. If you don’t provide them, the datastore will be set to `inmemory`, and the module will be set to `root` module by default.

Reviewer: We need to keep as `inmemory` here

This changes the Ballerina package as follows,

```
├── rainier
│   ├── persist
│   │		└── model.bal
│   ├── Ballerina.toml
│   └── main.bal

```
And adds the following configuration to the `Ballerina.toml` file.

```toml
[persist]
datastore = "inmemory"
module = "rainier.store"
```

These configurations are referred to when generating client objects for the data model. The recommendation is not to change these values. If you want to change it, remove these configurations from the `Ballerina.toml` file and reinitialize the `bal persist`.

> The next step is to define your data model in the schema file at `persist/model.bal`.

Author: ```suggestion
The next step is to define your data model in the schema file in the`persist/model.bal` file.
```
This sentence seems to be redundant.

## Model your data

The data model can be defined in the schema file inside the `persist` directory. You can use the empty file added by the `persist init` command for this.

For more information on defining a data model, refer to the [Data Model Definition](learn/persist-model/) documentation. In order to simplify this demonstration, only the `Employee` entity is added to the schema file. You can add as many as you want for your application and add relationships between entities.

> Once defined, the schema file looks like this.

Author: ```suggestion
Once defined, the schema file will be as follows.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/persist as _;
import ballerina/time;

public type Employee record {|
   readonly string employee_id;
   string first_name;
   string last_name;
   string email;
   string phone;
   time:Date hire_date;
   string? manager_id;
   string job_title;
|};
```

> This model is used to set up the underline datastore (e.g., set up the tables in the underlying database) and also as the base for the generated client APIs

Author: ```suggestion
This model is used to set up the underlying datastore (e.g., set up the tables in the underlying database) and also as the base for the generated client APIs.
```

## Generate the client object, types, and scripts

> Now you can generate the client objects, types, and SQL scripts for your model by running the command in your terminal,

Author: ```suggestion
Now, you can generate the client objects, types, and SQL scripts for your model by running the command in your terminal.
```

```
$ bal persist generate
```

This changes the Ballerina package as follows.

```
├── rainier
│   ├── generated
│   │		└── db
│   │		│	├── persist_client.bal
│   │		│	└── persist_types.bal
│   ├── persist
│   │		└── model.bal
│   ├── Ballerina.toml
│   └── main.bal
    
```

The `persist generate` will parse the `persist/model.bal` definition file and generate the following.

|         File          |                                         Description                                         |
|:---------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|

> | `persist_client.bal`  |               This is the client that is used to persist and retrieve data..                |

Author: ```suggestion
| `persist_client.bal`  |               This is the client that is used to persist and retrieve data.               |
```

|  `persist_types.bal`  |       This contains the record types that will be used to persist and retrieve data.        |

> > Note: All of the above auto-generated bal files should not be modified.

Author: ```suggestion
> Note: All of the above auto-generated BAL files should not be modified.
```

> > Note: If you use other data stores like MySQL or Google Sheets, additional files are created to handle runtime configurations and scripts to set up the database/worksheet. Since we are using `in-memory`, we don’t need any configuration and pre-setting up to run the application.

Author: ```suggestion
> Note: If you use other data stores like MySQL or Google Sheets, additional files are created to handle runtime configurations and scripts to set up the database/worksheet. Since `in-memory` is used, you don’t need any configuration and pre setting up to run the application.
```
Can we combine these 2 notes?

## Query your database with Persist Client

> You first need to instantiate the generated client object inside the `rainier.store` module like below,

Author: ```suggestion
First, you need to instantiate the generated client object inside the `rainier.store` module like below.
```

```ballerina
import rainier.store;

store:Client sClient = check new();
```

> Now you can use this `sClient` as the client to query your database. The client provides five resource methods to query. Let’s explore each of these clients’ methods separately. You can use the `main.bal` file created inside your project to explore the functionalities.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use this `sClient` as the client to query your database. It provides five resource methods to query. Let’s explore each of the methods of the client separately. You can use the `main.bal` file created inside your project to explore the functionalities.
```

### Create a new `Employee` record

> Let’s start with a small query to create a new `Employee` record in the database and log the results to the console. Update the following in your `main.bal` file.

Author: ```suggestion
Let’s start with a query to create a new `Employee` record in the database and log the results to the console. Update the following in your `main.bal` file.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/uuid;
import rainier.store;

final store:Client sClient = check new();

public function main() returns error? {
   store:EmployeeInsert employee1 = {
       employee_id: uuid:createType4AsString(),
       first_name: "John",
       last_name: "Doe",
       email: "johnd@xyz.com",
       phone: "1234567890",
       hire_date: {
           year: 2020,
           month: 10,
           day: 10
       },
       manager_id: "123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000",
       job_title: "Software Engineer"
   };

   string[] employeeIds = check sClient->/employees.post([employee1]);
   io:println("Inserted employee id: " + employeeIds[0]);
}
```

> You can run your Ballerina project with the following command:

Author: ```suggestion
You can run your Ballerina project with the following command.
```

```
$ bal run
Compiling source
        foo/rainier:0.1.0

Running executable

Inserted employee id: 16c6553a-373c-4b29-b1c8-c282f444248c
```

> Congratulations!! You created your first database record with the Persist Client. In the next sections, you will learn how to read data from the database.

Author: ```suggestion
This creates the first database record with the Persist Client. The next sections describe how to read data from the database.
```
Need to avoid marketing jargon in technical docs.

### Retrieve all `Employee` records

> Let’s try to fetch all the records we inserted in the database. Persist client offers get resource method which returns a stream of the return type. The return type can be either a complete `Employee` record or a custom record with a subset of fields.

Author: ```suggestion
Let’s try to fetch all the records inserted into the database. The Persist Client offers the `get` resource method, which returns a stream of the return type. The return type can be either a complete `Employee` record or a custom record with a subset of fields.
```

> Replace the previous code and add the new get call instead,

Author: ```suggestion
Replace the previous code and add the new `get` call instead.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import rainier.store;
import ballerina/persist;

final store:Client sClient = check new ();

public function main() returns error? {

>    // Get complete Employee record

Author: ```suggestion
   // Get the complete `Employee` record.
```

   string last_name;
|};
```

Run the Ballerina project again,

```
$ bal run

Compiling source
        foo/rainier:0.1.0

Running executable

{"employee_id":"16c6553a-373c-4b29-b1c8-c282f444248c","first_name":"John","last_name":"Doe","email":"johnd@xyz.com","phone":"1234567890","hire_date":{"year":2020,"month":10,"day":10},"manager_id":"123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000","job_title":"Software Engineer"}

{"employee_id":"16c6553a-373c-4b29-b1c8-c282f444248c","first_name":"John","last_name":"Doe"}
```

You will get the same results as you have only one record. Let’s explore the update function.

### Update the `Employee` record

With the Persist Client, we can easily update the record with the given id. You only need to pass the fields that need to be updated with the new values. In this case, The Job title of the given employee is updated from `Software Engineer` to `Senior Software Engineer`.

Replace the previous code and add the new update call instead,

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import rainier.store;

final store:Client sClient = check new ();

public function main() returns error? {
   string empId = "16c6553a-373c-4b29-b1c8-c282f444248c";

>    // Update the job title of the employee with the given id

Author: ```suggestion
   // Update the job title of the employee with the given ID.
```

   store:Employee employee = check sClient->/employees/[empId].put({
       job_title: "Senior Software Engineer"
   });
   io:println(employee);
}
```

> Run the Ballerina project again,

Author: ```suggestion
Run the Ballerina project again.
```
Normally, we give the command the output seperately.

```
$ bal run

Compiling source
        foo/rainier:0.1.0

Running executable

{"employee_id":"16c6553a-373c-4b29-b1c8-c282f444248c","first_name":"John","last_name":"Doe","email":"johnd@xyz.com","phone":"1234567890","hire_date":{"year":2020,"month":10,"day":10},"manager_id":"123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000","job_title":"Senior Software Engineer"}
```

> Now you have successfully execute CREATE, READ and UPDATE queries against your database. Let’s explore the final DELETE query in the next section.

Author: ```suggestion
Now, you have successfully executed the `CREATE`, `READ`, and `UPDATE` queries against your database. Let’s explore the final `DELETE` query in the next section.
```

### Delete the `Employee` record

> Similar to the client update call, you can use the `delete` action to delete the record with the given id.

Author: ```suggestion
Similar to the client `update` call, you can use the `delete` action to delete the record with the given ID.
```

> Replace the previous code and add the new delete call instead,

Author: ```suggestion
Replace the previous code and add the new `delete` call instead.
```
Should we specify in which file?

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/persist;
import rainier.store;

final store:Client sClient = check new ();

public function main() returns error? {
   string empId = "16c6553a-373c-4b29-b1c8-c282f444248c";

>    // Delete employee with the given id

Author: ```suggestion
   // Delete the employee with the given ID.
```

   _ = check sClient->/employees/[empId].delete();

>    // check if the employee is deleted

Author: ```suggestion
   // Check if the employee is deleted.
```

   store:Employee|persist:Error result = sClient->/employees/[empId].get();
   if result is persist:NotFoundError {
       io:println("Employee not found");
   } else {
       io:println("Employee found");
   }
}
```

> Run the Ballerina project again,

Author: ```suggestion
Run the Ballerina project again.
```
Normally, we give the command and the output separately.

```
$ bal run

Compiling source
        foo/rainier:0.1.0

Running executable

Employee not found
```

> Great Job, you just run all the queries against your database successfully. Your next task is to expose the database queries via an HTTP RESTful API to build a data service.

Author: ```suggestion
You just run all the queries against your database successfully. Your next task is to expose the database queries via an HTTP RESTful API to build a data service.
```
Avoid marketing jargon.

## Expose the database via an HTTP RESTful API

After you have defined the methods necessary to manipulate the database, expose these selectively via an HTTP RESTful API.

> For this, you need to create an HTTP service, and within the service, you can define resource methods to provide access to the database. The complete code of the service will be as follows,

Author: ```suggestion
For this, you need to create an HTTP service, and within the service, you can define resource methods to provide access to the database. The complete code of the service will be as follows.
```

> Replace the previous code and add the service code instead,

Author: ```suggestion
Replace the previous code and add the service code instead.
```

Shall we specify in which file?

> ```ballerina

Author: ```suggestion
```ballerina
```
Should we add code comments to this code?

import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/persist;
import rainier.store;

final store:Client sClient = check new();

service /employees on new http:Listener(8080) {

   isolated resource function post .(store:EmployeeInsert emp) returns string|error? {
       string[] employeeIds = check sClient->/employees.post([emp]);
       return employeeIds[0];
   }
  
   isolated resource function get [string id]() returns store:Employee|error {
       return check sClient->/employees/[id];
   }
  
   resource function get .() returns store:Employee[]|error? {
       stream<store:Employee, persist:Error?> resultStream = sClient->/employees;
       return check from store:Employee employee in resultStream
           select employee;
   }

   isolated resource function put [string id](store:EmployeeUpdate emp) returns store:Employee|error? {
       return check sClient->/employees/[id].put(emp);
   }
  
   isolated resource function delete [string id]() returns store:Employee|error? {
       return check sClient->/employees/[id].delete();      
   }
}
```

> Run the Ballerina project again,

Author: ```suggestion
Run the Ballerina project again,
```
Normally, we add the command and the output separately.

```
$ bal run

Compiling source
        foo/rainier:0.1.0

Running executable
```

> > Info: This creates an /employees endpoint on port 8080, which can be accessed via a browser by visiting http://locahost:8080/employees.

Author: ```suggestion
> **Info:** This creates an `/employees` endpoint on port 8080, which can be accessed via a browser at http://locahost:8080/employees.
```

### Try the service

Invoke the defined resource method by sending the POST request below to http://localhost:8080/employees with the required data as a JSON payload.

```
$ curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/employees/
    -H 'Content-Type: application/json'
    -d '{
        "employee_id": "6",
        "first_name": "test",
        "last_name": "test",
        "email": "test@test.com",
        "phone": "882 771 110",
        "hire_date": {
            "year": 2021,
            "month": 12,
            "day": 16
        },
        "manager_id": "1",
        "job_title": "Sales Manager"
    }'
```

## References

> - [Bal Persist Overview](/learn/persist-overview/)

Author: ```suggestion
- [`bal persist` overview](/learn/persist-overview/)
```
Titles should be in sentence case.

> - [Data Model](/learn/persist-model/)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Data model](/learn/persist-model/)
```
Titles should be in sentence case.

- [Persist Client API](/learn/persist-client-api/)
- [Persist CLI Tool](/learn/persist-cli/)

> - [Supported Data Stores](/learn/supported-data-stores/)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Supported data stores](/learn/supported-data-stores/)
```
